---
layout: post
title: The day I didn't meet Johnny Depp
subtitle: Minamata, a public health movie
tags: [mercury poisoning, public health, minamata disease]
comments: true
---
The fifth edition of the [BCN Film Fest](https://www.bcnfilmfest.com/es) was held in Barcelona between April 15 and 23.
As in its previous years, it proposed a selection of films from both the national and international scene related to the world of literature and history. Everything I love!

Johnny Depp has presented the film 'Minamata', by Andrew Levitas, where he plays the photojournalist [William Eugene Smith](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/W._Eugene_Smith#:~:text=The%20book%20was%20published%20in,the%20effects%20of%20Minamata%20disease.),
a character with a life marked by addictions. All this happened two blocks from my house, unbelievable.
But I was late, and I did not meet Johnny in person... However, I did watch the movie and to my surprise I found that it dealt with a public health issue: ["Minamata disease"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minamata_disease).

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/WP3pKTssw_E" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

I remember having studied the disease in a book about medicine, from a clinical medicine perspective, but today watching the movie I have some reflections to share here:

- The Minamata disaster - which affected thousand people - was the first large-scale incident of mercury poisoning. But it was not the only one. A similar, though minor, mercury poisoning incident occurred in Niigata Prefecture in 1965, and in 1969, another among indigenous people in Ontario, Canada.
- The authorities ignored the first cases. Since the disease was located in a small area, it was considered that it could be contagious, which led to the isolation and ostracism of its inhabitants. A revolt was necessary in 1959 so that an official study of the problem began. Even so, it took 12 years to determine exactly the causes, although from the beginning a nearby chemical company was suspected of being responsible. Over the years, it was discovered that a factory of the *Chisso* corporation had been secretly dumping large amounts of mercury into a nearby bay.
- We must remember that it was **not an accident**, but a clear example of negligence, seeking economic profit and disregard for the environment.

The film shows a type of journalism that is at the service of the people. During the end credits, Minamata displays a list of grotesque and often unpunished "spills" in other parts of the world, including Bhopal, Deepwater Horizon, and more. Perhaps these are microcosmic crimes and our current problems are bigger. In any case, I think Minamata is a reminder of what still needs to be done. 
I hope you see the movie and enjoy it as much as I did. Until next time!
